want to thank the
organizers for choosing a paper for this
award it was very
nice and I also want to thank my
incredible co-authors and collaborators
oral vineel and qule who stood right
before you a moment
ago and what you have here
is an image a screenshot
from a similar talk 10 years ago at new
RPS in 2014 in
Montreal and it was a much more innocent
time here we are shown in the
photos this is the before here's the
after by the
way and now we've got more
experienced hopefully wiser
but here I'd like to talk a little bit
about the work itself and maybe a 10year
retrospective on
it because a lot of the things in this
work were correct but some not so much
and we can review them and we can see
what happened and how it gently flowed
to where we are
today so let's begin by talking about
what we did and the way we'll do it
is by showing
slides from the same talk 10 years
ago but the summary of what we did is
the following three bullet points it's
an auto regressive model train on text
it's a large neural network and it's a
large data set and that's it now let's
dive in into the details a little bit
more so this was a slide 10 years ago
not too bad the Deep load
hypothesis and what we said here is that
if you have a large neural network with
layers then it can do anything that a
human being can do in a fraction of a
second like why did we have this
emphasis emphasis on things that human
beings can do in a fraction of a second
why this thing specifically well if you
believe the Deep learning Dogma so to
say that artificial neurons and
biological neurons are similar or at
least not too
different and you believe that real
neurons are slow than anything that we
can do quickly by we I mean human beings
I even mean just one human in the entire
world if there is one human in the
entire world that can do some task in a
fraction of a second then a 10 layer
neural network can do it too right it
follows you just take their connections
and you embed them inside your neuronet
the artificial one so this was the
motivation anything that a human being
can do in a fraction of a second second
a big 10 10 layer neural network can do
too we focused on 10 layer neural
networks because this was the neural
networks we knew how to train back in
the
day if you could go beyond in your
layers somehow then you could do more
but back then we could only do 10 layers
which is why we emphasized whatever
human beings can do in a fraction of a
second a different slide from the talk a
slide which says our main idea and you
may be able to recognize two things or
at least one thing you might be able to
recognize that something Auto regressive
is going on here what is it saying
really what does this slide really say
this slide says that if you have an auto
regressive
model and it predicts the next token
well enough then it will in fact grab
and capture and grasp the correct
distribution over whatever over
sequences that come next and this was a
relatively new thing it wasn't literally
the first
ever Auto regressive neural network but
I would argue it was the first Auto
regressive neural network where we
really believed that if you train it
really well then you will get whatever
you want in our case back then was the
humble today humble then incredibly
audacious task of
translation now I'm going to show you
some ancient history that many of you
might have never seen before it's called
the
lstm to those unfamiliar an lstm is the
things that poor deplan researchers did
before
Transformers and it's basically a res
net but rotated 90° so that's an
lsdm and it came before it's
like it's like kind of like a slightly
more complicated reset you can see there
is your integrator which is now called
the residual stream but you've got some
multiplication going on it's a little
bit more
complicated but that's what we did it
was a reset Ro
90° another cool feature from that Old
talk that I want to highlight is that we
used parallelization but not just any
parallelization we used
pipelining as witnessed by this one
layer per
GPU was it wise to pipeline as we now
know pipelining is not wise but we were
not as wise back then so we used that
and we got a 3.5x speed up using eight
gpus
and the conclusion slide in some sense
the conclusion slide from the talk from
back then is the most important slide
because it spelled out what could
arguably be the beginning of the scaling
hypothesis right that if you have a very
big data set and you train a very big
neural network then success is
guaranteed and one can argue if one is
charitable that this indeed has been
what's been happening
I want to mention one other idea and
this is I claim the idea that truly
stood the test of time it's the core
idea of deploying itself it's the idea
of connectionism it's the idea that if
you allow yourself to
believe that an artificial neuron is
kind of sort
of like a biological
neuron right if you believe that one is
kind of sort like the
other then it gives you the confidence
to believe that very large neural
networks they don't need to be literally
human brain scale they might be a little
bit smaller but you could configure them
to do pretty much all the
things that we do human beings there's
still a difference oh I forgot to the
end there is still a difference because
the human brain also figures out how to
reconfigure itself whereas we are using
the best learning algorithms that we
have which
require as many data points as there are
parameters human beings are still better
in this
regard but what this led so I claim
arguably to the age of pre-training and
the age of pre-training is what we might
say the gpt2 model the gpt3 model the
scaling laws and I want to specifically
call out my former collaborators Alec
Radford also Jared Kaplan Dario
mode for really making this
work but that led to the age of
pre-training and this is what's been the
driver of all of progress all the
progress that we see today extra large
neural
networks extraordinar large neural
networks trained on huge data
sets but pre-training as we know it will
unquestionably end
pre-training will end why will it end
because while computers growing through
better Hardware better
algorithms and logic clusters right all
those things keep increasing your
compute all these things keep increasing
your compute the data is not
growing because we have but one
internet we have but one
internet you could even say you can even
go as far as to say that data is the
fossil fuel of
AI it was like created
somehow and now we use
it and we've achieved Peak data and
there'll be no more we have to deal with
the data that we have now it still still
let us go quite far but this
is there's only one
internet so here I'll take um a bit of
Liberty to speculate about what comes
next actually I don't need to speculate
because many people are speculating too
and I'll mention their
speculations you may have heard the
phrase agents it's common and I'm sure
that eventually something will happen
but people feel like something agents is
the
future more concretely but also a little
bit vaguely synthetic data but what does
synthetic data mean figuring this out is
a big challenge
and I'm sure that different people have
all kinds of interesting progress there
and an inference time compute or maybe
what's been most recently most vividly
seen in 01 the o1 model these are all
examples of things of people trying to
figure
out what to do after
pre-training and those are all very good
things to
do I want to mention one other example
from biology which I think is really
cool
and the example is this so about many
many years ago at this conference also I
saw a talk where someone presented this
graph but the graph showed the
relationship between the size of the
body
of the size of the body of a mammal and
the size of their brain in this case
it's in mass and the that talk I
remember vividly they were saying look
it's in biology everything is so messy
but here you have one rare example where
there is a very tight relationship
between the size of the body of the
animal and their brain and totally
randomly I became curious at this graph
and one of the early one of the early so
I went to Google to do research to to
look for this graph and one of the
images and Google Images was this and
the interesting thing in this
image is you see like I don't know is
the mouse work working oh yeah the mouse
is working great so you've got this
mammals right all the different
mammals then you've got nonhuman
primates it's basically the same thing
but then you've got the hominids and to
my knowledge hominids are like close
relatives to the humans in
evolution like the
neand there's a bunch of them like it's
called homohabilis maybe there a whole
bunch and they're all here and what's
interesting is that they have a
different slope on their brain to body
scaling
exponent so that's pretty cool what that
means is that there is a precedent there
is an example
of biology figuring out some kind of
different scaling something clearly is
different so I think that is cool and by
the way I want to highlight highl light
this xaxis is log scale you see this is
100 this is a th000 10,000 100,000 and
likewise in grams 1 g 10 G 100 g th000
g
so it is possible for things to be
different the things that we are doing
the things that we've been scaling so
far is actually the first thing that we
figured out how to scale and without
doubt the field everyone who's working
here will figure out
what to do but I want to talk here I
want to take a few minutes and speculate
about the longer term the longer term
where are we all headed right we're
making all this progress it's an it's
astounding progress It's really I
mean those of you who' have been in the
field 10 years ago and you remember just
how incapable everything has
been like yes you can say even if you
kind of say of course learning still to
see it is just
unbelievable it's
completely I can't convey that feeling
to
you you know if you joined the field in
the last two years then of course you
speak to computers and they talk back to
you and they disagree and that's what
computers are but it hasn't always been
the case but I want to talk to a little
bit about super intelligence just a bit
cuz that is obviously where this field
is headed this is obviously what's being
built here and the thing about super
intelligence is that it will be
different qualitatively from what we
have and my goal in the next minute to
try to give
you some concrete intuition of how it
will be different so that you yourself
could reason about
it so right now we have our incredible
language models and the unbelievable
chat bot and they can even do things but
they're also kind of strangely
unreliable and they get confused
when while also
having dramatically superhuman
performance on evals so it's really
unclear how to reconcile this but
eventually sooner or later the following
will be achieved those systems are
actually going to be agentic in a real
ways whereas right now the systems are
not agents in any meaningful sense just
very that might be too strong they're
very very slightly agentic just
beginning it will actually reason and by
the way I want to mention something
about reasoning is that a system that
reasons the more it reasons the more
unpredictable it becomes the more it
reasons the more unpredictable it
becomes all the Deep learning that we've
been used to is very predictable because
if you've been working on replicating
human intuition essentially it's like
the gut fi if you come back to the 0.1
second reaction time what kind of
processing we do in our brains well
it's our intuition so we've endowed
ouris with some of that intuition but
reasoning you're seeing some early signs
of that reasoning is unpredictable and
one reason to see that is because the
chess AIS the really good ones are
unpredictable to the best human chess
players so we will have to be dealing
with AI systems that are incredibly
unpredictable they will understand
things from limited data they will not
get confused all the things which are
really big limitations I'm not saying
how by the way and I'm not saying when
I'm saying that it
will and when all those things will
happen together with
self-awareness because why not
self-awareness is useful it is part your
ourselves are parts of our own world
models when all those things come
together we will have systems of
radically different qualities and
properties that exist today and of
course they will have incredible and
amazing capabili is but the kind of
issues that come up with systems like
this and I'll just leave it as an
exercise to um
imagine it's very different from what we
used to
and I would say that it's definitely
also impossible to predict the future
really all kinds of stuff is possible
but on this uplifting note I will
conclude thank you so much um
[Applause]
[Music]
thank
you um now in
2024 are there other biological
structures that are part of human
cognition that you think are worth
exploring in a similar way or that
you're interested in anyway
so the way I'd answer this
question is that if you are or someone
is a person who has a specific insight
about hey we are all being extremely
silly because clearly the brain does
something and we are
not and that's something that can be
done they should pursue it I personally
don't
well depends on the level of abstraction
you're looking at maybe I'll answer it
this way like there's been a lot of
desire to make biologically inspired Ai
and you could argue on some level that
biologically inspired AI is incredibly
successful which is all of the learning
biologically inspired AI but on the
other hand the biological inspiration
was very very very modest it's like
let's use neurons this is the full
extent of the biological inspiration
let's use
neurons and more detailed bi iCal
inspiration has been very hard to come
by but I wouldn't rule it out I think if
someone has a special Insight they might
be able to to see something and that
would be
useful I have a question for you um
about sort of autocorrect um so here is
here's the question you mentioned
reasoning as being um one of the core
aspects of maybe the modeling in the
future and maybe a differentiator
um what we saw in some of the poster
sessions is that hallucinations in
today's models are the way we're
analyzing I mean maybe you correct me
you're the expert on this but the way
we're analyzing whether a model is
hallucinating today without because we
know of the dangers of models not being
able to reason that we're using a
statistical analysis let's say some
amount of standard deviations or
whatever away from the mean in the
future wouldn't it would do you think
that a model given reasoning will be
able to correct itself sort of
autocorrect itself and that will be a
core feature of Future model so that
there won't be as many hallucinations
because the model will recognize when I
maybe that's too esoteric of a question
but the model will be able to reason and
understand when a Hallucination is
occurring does the question make sense
yes and the answer is also yes I think
what you described is extremely highly
plausible yeah I mean you should check I
mean for yeah it's I wouldn't I wouldn't
rule out that it might already be
happening with some of the you know
early reasoning models of today I don't
know but longer term why not yeah I mean
it's part part of like Microsoft Word
like autocorrect it's a you know it's a
it's a core feature yeah I just I mean I
think calling it autocorrect is really
doing any disservice I think you are
when you say autocorrect you evoke
like it's far grander than autocorrect
but other than but you know this point
aside the answer is yes thank
you hiia I loved the ending uh
mysteriously uh leaving out do they
replace us or are they you know Superior
do they need rights you know it's a new
species of homo sapien spawned
intelligence so maybe they need I mean
uh I think the RL guy uh thinks they
think uh you know we need rights for
these things I have a UNR question to
that how do you how do you create the
right incentive mechanisms for Humanity
to actually create it in a way that
gives it the freedoms that we have as
Homo
sapiens you know I feel like this in
some in some in some sense those are
those are the kind of questions that
people should be uh reflecting on
more but
to your question about what incentive
structure should we create I I don't
feel that I know I don't feel confident
answering questions like this
because uh it's like you're talking
about creating some kind of a top down
structure government thing I don't know
it could be a cryptocurrency too yeah I
mean there's bit tensor you know those
things I don't feel like I am the right
person to comment on
cryptocurrency but
but you know there is a chance by the
way what what you're describing will
happen that indeed we will have you know
in some sense it's it's it's not a bad
end result if you have AIS and all they
want is to coexist with
us and also just to have rights maybe
that will be fine
it's but I don't know I mean I think
things are so incredibly unpredictable I
I hesitate to comment but I encourage
the speculation thank you uh and uh yeah
thank you for the talk it's really
awesome hi there thank you for the great
talk my name is shalev liit from
University of Toronto working with
Sheila thanks for all the work you've
done I wanted to ask do you think llms
generalize multihop Reon reasoning out
of
distribution so okay the question
assumes that the answer is yes or no but
the question should not be answered with
yes or no because what does it mean out
of distribution generalization what does
it mean what does it mean in
distribution and what does it mean out
of distribution because it's a test of
time talk I'll say that long long
ago before people were using deep
learning they were using things like
string matching engrams for machine
translation people were using
statistical phrase tables can you
imagine they had tens of thousands of
code of complexity which was I mean it's
it was truly
unfathomable and back then
generalization meant is it literally not
in this the same phrasing as in the data
set now we may say well my model
achieves this high score on um I don't
know math competitions but maybe the
math maybe some discussion in some Forum
on the internet was about the same ideas
and therefore it's memorized well okay
you could say maybe it's in distribution
maybe it's
memorization but I also think that our
standards for what counts as
generalization have increased really
quite substantially dramatically
unimaginably if you keep
track
and so I think then answer is to some
degree probably not as well as human
beings I think it is true that human
beings generalize much better but at the
same time they definitely generalize out
of distribution to some
degree I hope it's a useful topological
answer thank
you and unfortunately we're out of time
for this session I have a feeling we
could go on for the next six hours uh
but thank you so much Ilia for the talk
thank you wonderful
[Applause]
[Music]